packages/web/README.md, before:

# @strudel/web

This package provides an easy to use bundle of multiple strudel packages for the web.

## Usage

Save this code as a `.html` file and double click it:

```html
<!doctype html>
<script src="https://unpkg.com/@strudel/web@1.0.3"></script>
<button id="play">play</button>
<button id="stop">stop</button>
<script>
  initStrudel();
  document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('click', () => note('<c a f e>(3,8)').jux(rev).play());
  document.getElementById('stop').addEventListener('click', () => hush());
</script>
```

As soon as you call `initStrudel()`, all strudel functions are made available.
In this case, we are using the `note` function to create a pattern.
To actually play the pattern, you have to append `.play()` to the end.

Note: Due to the [Autoplay policy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Audio_API/Best_practices#autoplay_policy), you can only play audio in a browser after a click event.

### Via npm

If you're using a bundler, you can install the package via `npm i @strudel/web`, then just import it like:

```js
import { initStrudel } from '@strudel/web';
```

The rest of the code should be the same. Check out [vite](https://vitejs.dev/) for a good bundler / dev server.

### Loading samples

By default, no external samples are loaded, but you can add them like this:

```js
initStrudel({
  prebake: () => samples('github:tidalcycles/dirt-samples'),
});

document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('click', 
  () => s("bd sd").play()
)
```

You can learn [more about the `samples` function here](https://strudel.cc/learn/samples#loading-custom-samples).

### Evaluating Code

Instead of creating patterns directly in JS, you might also want to take in user input and turn that into a pattern.
This is called evaluation: Taking a piece of code and executing it on the fly.

To do that, you can use the `evaluate` function:

```js
initStrudel();
document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('click', 
  () => evaluate('note("c a f e").jux(rev)')
);
document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('stop', 
  () => hush()
);
```

### Double vs Single Quotes

There is a tiny difference between the [Strudel REPL](https://strudel.cc/) and `@strudel/web`.
In the REPL you can use 'single quotes' for regular JS strings and "double quotes" for mini notation patterns.
In `@strudel/web`, it does not matter which types of quotes you're using.
There will probably be an escapte hatch for that in the future.

## More Examples

Check out the examples folder for more examples, both using plain html and vite!

Commit message:

add more info on using strings for patterns in web package

packages/web/README.md, after:

# @strudel/web

This package provides an easy to use bundle of multiple strudel packages for the web.

## Usage

Save this code as a `.html` file and double click it:

```html
<!doctype html>
<script src="https://unpkg.com/@strudel/web@1.0.3"></script>
<button id="play">play</button>
<button id="stop">stop</button>
<script>
  initStrudel();
  document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('click', () => note('<c a f e>(3,8)').jux(rev).play());
  document.getElementById('stop').addEventListener('click', () => hush());
</script>
```

As soon as you call `initStrudel()`, all strudel functions are made available.
In this case, we are using the `note` function to create a pattern.
To actually play the pattern, you have to append `.play()` to the end.

Note: Due to the [Autoplay policy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Audio_API/Best_practices#autoplay_policy), you can only play audio in a browser after a click event.

### Via npm

If you're using a bundler, you can install the package via `npm i @strudel/web`, then just import it like:

```js
import { initStrudel } from '@strudel/web';
```

The rest of the code should be the same. Check out [vite](https://vitejs.dev/) for a good bundler / dev server.

### Loading samples

By default, no external samples are loaded, but you can add them like this:

```js
initStrudel({
  prebake: () => samples('github:tidalcycles/dirt-samples'),
});

document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('click', 
  () => s("bd sd").play()
)
```

You can learn [more about the `samples` function here](https://strudel.cc/learn/samples#loading-custom-samples).

### Evaluating Code

Instead of creating patterns directly in JS, you might also want to take in user input and turn that into a pattern.
This is called evaluation: Taking a piece of code and executing it on the fly.

To do that, you can use the `evaluate` function:

```js
initStrudel();
document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('click', 
  () => evaluate('note("c a f e").jux(rev)')
);
document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('stop', 
  () => hush()
);
```

### Double vs Single Quotes

There is a tiny difference between the [Strudel REPL](https://strudel.cc/) and `@strudel/web`.
In the REPL you can use 'single quotes' for regular JS strings and "double quotes" for mini notation patterns.
In `@strudel/web`, it does not matter which types of quotes you're using.

This difference means that you cannot call pattern methods on raw strings, for example `"1 2 3".slow(2)`.
To make it work you can either:

1. Use the `evaluate` function, which behaves exactly like the Strudel REPL, interpreting double quoted strings as mini notation.
2. wrap the string with `m`: `m("1 2 3").slow(2)`
3. wrap the string in a control function: `n("1 2 3").slow(2)` depending on your context.

## More Examples

Check out the examples folder for more examples, both using plain html and vite!
