website/src/pages/technical-manual/docs.mdx, before:

---
title: Docs
layout: ../../layouts/MainLayout.astro
---

# Docs

The docs page is built ontop of astro's [docs site](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/main/examples/docs).

## Adding a new Docs Page

1. add a `.mdx` file in a path under `website/src/pages/`, e.g. [website/src/pages/learn/code.mdx](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tidalcycles/strudel/main/website/src/pages/learn/code.mdx) will be available under https://strudel.tidalcycles.org/learn/code (or locally under `http://localhost:3000/learn/code`)
2. make sure to copy the top part of another existing docs page. Adjust the title accordingly
3. To add a link to the sidebar, add a new entry to `SIDEBAR` to [`config.ts`](https://github.com/tidalcycles/strudel/blob/main/website/src/config.ts)

## Using the Mini REPL

To add a Mini REPL, make sure to import:

```js
import { MiniRepl } from '../../docs/MiniRepl';
```

add a mini repl with

```jsx
<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`note("a3 c#4 e4 a4")`} />
```

- `client:idle` is required to tell astro that the repl should be interactive, see [Client Directive](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/directives-reference/#client-directives)
- `tune`: be any valid pattern code
- `drawTime`: time window for drawing. Use together with `.punchcard()`. Example:

```jsx
<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`note("a3 c#4 e4 a4").punchcard()`} drawTime={[0, 2]} />
```

## In-Source Documentation

You can add the in-source documentation for a function by using the `JsDoc` component. Import:

```js
import { JsDoc } from '../../docs/JsDoc';
```

Usage:

```jsx
<JsDoc client:idle name="bandf" h={0} />
```

- `name`: function name, as named with `@name` in jsdoc
- `h`: level of heading. `0` will hide the heading. Hiding it allows using a manual heading which results in a nav link being generated in the right sidebar.
- `hideDescription`: if set, the description will be hidden

### Writing jsdoc

Documentation is written with [jsdoc](https://jsdoc.app/) comments. Example:

```js
/**
 * Select a sound / sample by name.
 *
 * @name s
 * @param {string | Pattern} sound The sound / pattern of sounds to pick
 * @example
 * s("bd hh")
 *
 */
// implementation of s function
```

- Before each build, these comments will be rendered into `doc.json` using [jsdoc-json](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jsdoc-json) as a template
- To regenerate the `doc.json` file manually, run `npm run jsdoc-json`
- The file is used by the `JsDoc` component to find the documentation by name
- Also, it is used for the `examples.test.mjs` snapshot test

Commit message:

MiniRepl: add punchcard flag for implicit vis + reintroduce editPattern + add punchcards to mini-notation.mdx

website/src/pages/technical-manual/docs.mdx, after:

---
title: Docs
layout: ../../layouts/MainLayout.astro
---

# Docs

The docs page is built ontop of astro's [docs site](https://github.com/withastro/astro/tree/main/examples/docs).

## Adding a new Docs Page

1. add a `.mdx` file in a path under `website/src/pages/`, e.g. [website/src/pages/learn/code.mdx](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tidalcycles/strudel/main/website/src/pages/learn/code.mdx) will be available under https://strudel.tidalcycles.org/learn/code (or locally under `http://localhost:3000/learn/code`)
2. make sure to copy the top part of another existing docs page. Adjust the title accordingly
3. To add a link to the sidebar, add a new entry to `SIDEBAR` to [`config.ts`](https://github.com/tidalcycles/strudel/blob/main/website/src/config.ts)

## Using the Mini REPL

To add a Mini REPL, make sure to import:

```js
import { MiniRepl } from '../../docs/MiniRepl';
```

add a mini repl with

```jsx
<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`note("a3 c#4 e4 a4")`} />
```

- `client:idle` is required to tell astro that the repl should be interactive, see [Client Directive](https://docs.astro.build/en/reference/directives-reference/#client-directives)
- `tune`: be any valid pattern code
- `punchcard`: if added, a punchcard / pianoroll visualization is renderd
- `drawTime`: time window for drawing, defaults to `[0, 4]`
- `canvasHeight`: height of the canvas, defaults to 100px

See `mini-notation.mdx` for usage examples

## In-Source Documentation

You can add the in-source documentation for a function by using the `JsDoc` component. Import:

```js
import { JsDoc } from '../../docs/JsDoc';
```

Usage:

```jsx
<JsDoc client:idle name="bandf" h={0} />
```

- `name`: function name, as named with `@name` in jsdoc
- `h`: level of heading. `0` will hide the heading. Hiding it allows using a manual heading which results in a nav link being generated in the right sidebar.
- `hideDescription`: if set, the description will be hidden

### Writing jsdoc

Documentation is written with [jsdoc](https://jsdoc.app/) comments. Example:

```js
/**
 * Select a sound / sample by name.
 *
 * @name s
 * @param {string | Pattern} sound The sound / pattern of sounds to pick
 * @example
 * s("bd hh")
 *
 */
// implementation of s function
```

- Before each build, these comments will be rendered into `doc.json` using [jsdoc-json](https://www.npmjs.com/package/jsdoc-json) as a template
- To regenerate the `doc.json` file manually, run `npm run jsdoc-json`
- The file is used by the `JsDoc` component to find the documentation by name
- Also, it is used for the `examples.test.mjs` snapshot test
