website/src/pages/learn/code.mdx, before:

---
title: Coding syntax
layout: ../../layouts/MainLayout.astro
---

import { MiniRepl } from '../../docs/MiniRepl';
import { JsDoc } from '../../docs/JsDoc';

# Strudel Code

Now that we have played some notes using different sounds, let's take a step back and look how we actually achieved this using _code_.

Let's look at this simple example again. What do we notice?

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`freq("220 275 330 440").s("sine")`} />

- We have a word `freq` which is followed by some brackets `()` with some words/letters/numbers inside, surrounded by quotes `"220 275 330 440"` (corresponding to the pitches a3, c#4, e4, a4).
- Then we have a dot `.` followed by another similar piece of code `s("sine")`.
- We can also see these texts are _highlighted_ using colours: word `freq` is purple, the brackets `()` are grey, and the content inside the `""` are green.

What happens if we try to 'break' this pattern in different ways?

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`freq(220 275 330 440).s(sine)`} />

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`freq("220 275 330 440")s("sine")`} />

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`freq["220 275 330 440"].s{"sine"}`} />

Ok, none of these seem to work...

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`s("sine").freq("220 275 330 440")`} />

This one does work, but now we can't hear the four different events and frequencies anymore.

So what is going on here?

# Functions, arguments and chaining

So far, we've seen the following syntax:

```
xxx("foo").yyy("bar")
```

Generally, `xxx` and `yyy` are called [_functions_](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Function_(computer_programming)>), while `foo` and `bar` are called function [_arguments_ or _parameters_](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parameter_(computer_programming)>).
So far, we've used the functions to declare which aspect of the sound we want to control, and their arguments for the actual data.
The `yyy` function is called a [_chained_ function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Method_chaining), because it is appended with a dot (`.`).

Generally, the idea with chaining is that code such as `a("this").b("that").c("other")` allows `a`, `b` and `c` functions to happen in a specified order, without needing to write them as three separate lines of code.
You can think of this as being similar to chaining audio effects together using guitar pedals or digital audio effects.

Strudel makes heavy use of chained functions. Here is a more sophisticated example:

<MiniRepl
  client:idle
  tune={`note("a3 c#4 e4 a4")
.s("sawtooth")
.cutoff(500)
//.delay(0.5)
.room(0.5)`}
/>

# Comments

The `//` in the example above is a line comment, resulting in the `delay` function being ignored.
It is a handy way to quickly turn code on and off.
Try uncommenting this line by deleting `//` and refreshing the pattern.
You can also use the keyboard shortcut `cmd-/` to toggle comments on and off.

# Strings

Ok, so what about the content inside the quotes (e.g. `"a3 c#4 e4 a4"`)?
In JavaScript, as in most programming languages, this content is referred to as being a [_string_](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_(computer_science)>).
A string is simply a sequence of individual characters.
In TidalCycles, double quoted strings are used to write _patterns_ using the mini-notation, and you may hear the phrase _pattern string_ from time to time.
If you want to create a regular string and not a pattern, you can use single quotes, e.g. `'C minor'` will not be parsed as Mini Notation.

The good news is, that this covers 99% of the JavaScript syntax needed for Strudel!

Let's now look at the way we can express [Rhythms](/learn/mini-notation)...

<br />

Commit message:

doc: add section about metadata

website/src/pages/learn/code.mdx, after:

---
title: Coding syntax
layout: ../../layouts/MainLayout.astro
---

import { MiniRepl } from '../../docs/MiniRepl';
import { JsDoc } from '../../docs/JsDoc';

# Strudel Code

Now that we have played some notes using different sounds, let's take a step back and look how we actually achieved this using _code_.

Let's look at this simple example again. What do we notice?

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`freq("220 275 330 440").s("sine")`} />

- We have a word `freq` which is followed by some brackets `()` with some words/letters/numbers inside, surrounded by quotes `"220 275 330 440"` (corresponding to the pitches a3, c#4, e4, a4).
- Then we have a dot `.` followed by another similar piece of code `s("sine")`.
- We can also see these texts are _highlighted_ using colours: word `freq` is purple, the brackets `()` are grey, and the content inside the `""` are green.

What happens if we try to 'break' this pattern in different ways?

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`freq(220 275 330 440).s(sine)`} />

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`freq("220 275 330 440")s("sine")`} />

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`freq["220 275 330 440"].s{"sine"}`} />

Ok, none of these seem to work...

<MiniRepl client:idle tune={`s("sine").freq("220 275 330 440")`} />

This one does work, but now we can't hear the four different events and frequencies anymore.

So what is going on here?

# Functions, arguments and chaining

So far, we've seen the following syntax:

```
xxx("foo").yyy("bar")
```

Generally, `xxx` and `yyy` are called [_functions_](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Function_(computer_programming)>), while `foo` and `bar` are called function [_arguments_ or _parameters_](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parameter_(computer_programming)>).
So far, we've used the functions to declare which aspect of the sound we want to control, and their arguments for the actual data.
The `yyy` function is called a [_chained_ function](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Method_chaining), because it is appended with a dot (`.`).

Generally, the idea with chaining is that code such as `a("this").b("that").c("other")` allows `a`, `b` and `c` functions to happen in a specified order, without needing to write them as three separate lines of code.
You can think of this as being similar to chaining audio effects together using guitar pedals or digital audio effects.

Strudel makes heavy use of chained functions. Here is a more sophisticated example:

<MiniRepl
  client:idle
  tune={`note("a3 c#4 e4 a4")
.s("sawtooth")
.cutoff(500)
//.delay(0.5)
.room(0.5)`}
/>

# Comments

The `//` in the example above is a line comment, resulting in the `delay` function being ignored.
It is a handy way to quickly turn code on and off.
Try uncommenting this line by deleting `//` and refreshing the pattern.
You can also use the keyboard shortcut `cmd-/` to toggle comments on and off.

You might noticed that some comments in the REPL samples include some words starting with a "@", like `@title` or `@license`.
Those are just a convention to define some information about the music. We will talk about it in the *metadata* section.

# Strings

Ok, so what about the content inside the quotes (e.g. `"a3 c#4 e4 a4"`)?
In JavaScript, as in most programming languages, this content is referred to as being a [_string_](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/String_(computer_science)>).
A string is simply a sequence of individual characters.
In TidalCycles, double quoted strings are used to write _patterns_ using the mini-notation, and you may hear the phrase _pattern string_ from time to time.
If you want to create a regular string and not a pattern, you can use single quotes, e.g. `'C minor'` will not be parsed as Mini Notation.

The good news is, that this covers 99% of the JavaScript syntax needed for Strudel!

Let's now look at the way we can express [Rhythms](/learn/mini-notation)...

<br />
